[DebugInfo] Improve documentation & Fix discovered bugs (#73276)
apple/swift: docs/HowToUpdateDebugInfo.md

reading, since all of the concepts discussed there also apply to SIL.

## Source Locations

Contrary to LLVM IR, SIL makes source locations and lexical scopes mandatory on
all instructions. SIL transformations should follow the LLVM guide for when to
merge drop and copy locations, since all the same considerations apply. Helpers
like `SILBuilderWithScope` make it easy to copy source locations when expanding
SIL instructions.

## Variables

Each `debug_value` (and variable-carrying instruction) defines an update point
for the location of (part of) that source variable. A variable location is an
SSA value, modified by a debug expression that can transform that value,
yielding the value of that variable. Optimizations like SROA may split a source
variable into multiple smaller fragments, other optimizations such as Mem2Reg
may split a debug value describing an address into multiple debug values
describing different SSA values. Each variable (fragment) location is valid
until the end of the current basic block, or until another `debug_value`
describes another location for a variable fragment for the same unique variable
that overlaps with that (fragment of the) variable.

> ### Debug variable carrying instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Debug variable-carrying instructions
```

Source variables are represented by `debug_value` instructions, and may also be

> described in debug variable carrying instructions (`alloc_stack`, `alloc_box`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
described in debug variable-carrying instructions (`alloc_stack`, `alloc_box`).
```

There is no semantic difference between describing a variable in an allocation
instruction directly or describing it in an `debug_value` following the
allocation instruction.

This is equivalent, and should be optimized similarly:
```
%0 = alloc_stack $T, var, name "value", loc "a.swift":4:2, scope 1
// equivalent to:
%0 = alloc_stack $T, loc "a.swift":4:2, scope 1
debug_value %0 : $*T, var, name "value", expr op_deref, loc "a.swift":4:2, scope 1
```

> [!Note]
> In the future, we may want to remove the debug variable from the `alloc_stack`
> to only use the second form, in order to simplify SIL. Additionally, we could
> then move the `debug_value` instruction to the point where the variable is
> initialized to avoid showing ununitialized memory in the debugger. This would
> be a change in SILGen, which should not affect the optimizer.

For now, the `DebugVarCarryingInst` type can be used to handle both cases.

### Variable identity, location and scope

Variables are uniquely identified via their lexical scope, their location, and
their name.

> The lexical scope, or debug scope, is the block in which the variable was

Reviewer: This more nuanced. The lexical scope is the enclosing `{ }` block, whereas the debug scope is more fine-grained and identical to the ASTScope of the variable. The difference is that the ASTScope begins directly at the variable declaration.

https://www.swift.org/blog/whats-new-swift-debugging-5.9/

declared. For arguments, this will be the function's scope, otherwise, this will
be a subscope within a function. When a function is inlined, a new scope is

> created, including information about the inlined function (inlined_at) and the

Reviewer: This is flipped around. The inlined_at is the inlined call *site* so it belongs to the function the function was inlined _into_.

parent function.

The location of the variable is the source location where the variable was
declared.

If the location and scope of a debug variable isn't set, it will use the scope
and location of the instruction, which is correct in most cases. However, if a
`debug_value` describes a modification of a variable, the instruction and

> variable will have different locations:

Reviewer: maybe add that the debug_value should have the source location of the update point.

```
%0 = integer_literal $Int, 2
debug_value %0 : $Int, var, name "a", loc "a.swift":2:5, scope 2
%2 = integer_literal $Int, 3
debug_value %2 : $Int, var, (name "a", loc "a.swift":2:5, scope 2), loc "a.swift":3:3, scope 2
```
For this code:
```swift
func hello() {
var a = 2
a = 3
}
```

### Variable types

By default the type of the variable will be the object type of the SSA value.
If this is not the correct type, a type must be attached to the debug variable
to override it.

Example:

```
debug_value %0 : $*T, let, name "address", type $UnsafeRawPointer
```

The variable will usually have an associated expression yielding the correct
type.

### Variable expressions

A variable can have an associated expression if the value needs computation.
This can be for dereferencing a pointer, arithmetic, or for splitting structs.
An expression is a sequence of operations to be executed left to right. Debug
expressions get lowered into LLVM
[DIExpressions](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#diexpression) which get

> lowered into [DWARF](https://dwarfstd.org) expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lowered into [DWARF](https://dwarfstd.org) expressions.
```

and, except fragments, no debug expression operator take a struct as input.

> [!Note]
> When multiple fragments are present, they are evaluated in the reverse way —
> from the field within the variable first, to the SSA's type at the end

#### Arithmetic

An expression can add or subtract a constant offset to a value. To do so, an
`op_constu` or `op_consts` can be used to push a constant integer to the stack,
respectively unsigned and signed. Then, the `op_plus` and `op_minus` operators
can be used to sum or subtract the two values on the stack.

```
debug_value %0 : $Builtin.Int64, var, name "previous", type $Int, expr op_consts:1:op_minus:op_fragment:#Int._value
debug_value %0 : $Builtin.Int64, var, name "current", type $Int, expr op_fragment:#Int._value
```

> [!Caution]
> This currently doesn't work if a fragment is present.

#### Constants

If a `debug_value` is describing a constant, such as in `let x = 1`, and the
value is optimized out, we can keep it, using a constant expression, and no SSA
value.

```
debug_value undef : $Int, let, name "x", expr op_consts:1:op_fragment:#Int._value
```

### Undef variables

> In case the value of the variable cannot be recovered as the value is entirely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the value of the variable cannot be recovered as the value is entirely
```
